February is a cold month in Kansas, especially with the prairie wind,
and on February 2, 1899, it was 22 degrees below zero. Henry and Carrie
Janzen were expecting the birth of their fifth child, and on this day
she went into labor. Attempts to get a doctor had failed and Henry had
moved the bed into a room where there was a heating stove. According to
the story Carrie later gave a newspaper, she had milked the cows and
scrubbed the floor when it became apparent that the time had come. She
said that when the baby finally came she got up and cleaned up, but felt
bad, and so laid down to rest. Shortly afterwards, a second baby
arrived, so she got up, cleaned it, but still felt bad. When the third
baby came, she was too tired to clean it and finally asked my
grandfather for help. It was not until the next day that the doctor
finally arrived, and he expressed concern because the afterbirth looked
abnormal. With that, my grandfather led him to another bed and showed
him the triplets; Edward Carl, Edmund Ernest, and Edna Clara. According
to one account, the doctor had a wooden leg, and when he saw the
triplets he was so excited that he started dancing. It is also said that
his charge for the visit was \$10, but he returned \$7 so a photograph
could be taken. Perhaps this is the photograph that is shown on the next
page. I have often wondered if these were the first European triplets
born in Kansas.

The names given to the triplets were carefully planned so the initials
of Edward Carl and Edna Clara would be the same as with their
grandfather’s (Edward Carl), and Edmund Ernest would be the same as his
uncle, Edward Ernest.

I can’t imagine having your family unexpectedly go from four to seven
children in one day, especially when the other four children weren’t
that old: Henry 6, Albert 5, Rosa 4, and Leroy 2. The house was not that
big and finances were limited, but these early homesteading families
knew how to survive. Eventually my grandfather’s children would become a
sizable workforce and make him wealthy. I once heard the finances of
these pioneer families described this way: the first six years it costs
to raise a child, the next six years their work equals their expenses,
and the next six years they pay for the first six. As you will see, my
grandfather derived a large profit from his children.

I don’t know a lot about my father’s early childhood, and most of what I
know I got from my mother. I know that as a child he never had a toy and
his parents never read children’s books to him. My mother said that when
they married he had not heard of Cinderella, or any of the fairy tales.
To rectify this, she got all of these books from the library and had him
read them.

The event that probably changed my father’s life the most was the death
of his triplet brother, Edmund, in August of 1899. The cause was
considered weed poisoning in cow’s milk. As a result of Edmund’s death,
my father was paired with his sister Edna, and therefore did not enjoy
the male camaraderie of his brothers to the degree that he would have
had Edmund lived. As a triplet, he was also smaller than his brothers,
and this seems to have made a difference. My mother said he was also
teased. In spite of these things, my father thought he had a normal
childhood and never resented his parents or siblings. If fact, as an
adult his favorite vacation was to go to Kansas and visit family, where
he was always received with open arms.

The absence of toys and ignorance concerning children’s stories is not
an indicator of neglect by his parents, but shows the survival mode that
underpinned life on the Kansas prairie at that time. However, as the
photographs of the Janzen family show, the children were always
well-dressed, at least in those photographs. My grandfather was proud of
his family, and their appearance was important to him.

I am sure that the family was always well-fed, though the menu might
seem Spartan by 21st century standards. My father spoke of having
potatoes with clabber milk for the evening meal and, being wheat
farmers, there was always an abundant supply of bread. One of my
father’s favorite stories was about a dried breakfast cereal they had,
called VIGOR. It was similar to corn flakes, which my father always
referred to as “fence post shavings.” At one time the makers of VIGOR
had a promotional, and in each box of cereal was a letter, V, I, G, O,
or R. There was a prize if you could collect all five letters. One of
the letters was difficult to get, and my father said that one morning
while he was dressing he heard his father give out a yell, they finally
had all five letters. As winners, the company sent them a barrel of
semi-porcelain English china made by Clementson Brothers. After his
parents died and things were being divided, my father got a bone dish
from this set and one of the twelve chairs that were around the kitchen
table.

As the family grew to ten children, my grandmother baked twelve loaves
of bread every other day. It is interesting how certain foods my father
had growing up remained his favorite after he left home. To him, fried
bologna was far superior to a filet mignon, and nothing went with it
better than creamed corn. His choice of candy also seemed strange to me.
One of his favorites was horehound drops, a hard candy made from extract
of the horehound plant, and it had a bittersweet taste that I found
generally disgusting. I guess that this was the kind of candy his father
bought the children at the general store, and they loved it.

I remember my father saying that every fall his father would be gone for
several days and return with a wagon load of apples and a barrel of
cider. I guess the apples were dried, or turned into applesauce, and
this lasted them through the winter.

My father was always very neat and kept things well organized. This was
probably a combination of his German upbringing and having five brothers
and four sisters. He told me that he and two of his brothers shared a
room. There was one dresser, and each of them had two drawers in the
dresser and a third of the top to keep their hair brushes and other
items. I doubt if he ever considered using more than his third. I
remember my father saying they never had underwear and his dress clothes
consisted of one wool suit. He said he knew what hell was like having to
sit through a church service in the summer in a wool suit with no
underwear.

By 1907, the Janzen family had grown to six boys and four girls. A
seventh boy, Walter, died in infancy. With this brood, my grandfather
had the labor to make the transition from farming to agriculture.
Well-established in the family system at this time was the division of
labor by sex. My grandmother and four girls were in charge of the house,
which meant cooking, laundry, and cleaning, while my grandfather and the
boys did the farm work. Actually, this division of labor was not fair,
because the last two Janzen children were girls, Nellie and Thelma. This
meant that Rosa and Edna were in their teens before Nellie and Thelma
started school, and along with their mother, were doing the bulk of the
female labor. I always remember my Aunt Rosa as being a happy person,
but my Aunt Edna played the role of what my mother called “Pitiful
Pearl.” She referred to herself as “Cinderella” and claimed that she
always did more than her share of the work. Who knows?

My grandfather’s farming activities were diversified and, beside growing
wheat, he also had cattle, and perhaps other things that I am not aware
of. I know my father talked about driving cattle to Ellsworth, Kansas.
Naturally my grandfather had a large number of horses, because they
pulled all the farm implements. My father said that over the winter the
horses were not used that much, and in the spring, they would have to be
“broken” again (broken means tamed). It is hard for me to imagine my
father on cattle drives and breaking horses in the corral. He also
mentioned the time his father told him to plow a field that had never
been cultivated before, where watermelons were planted as a cover crop.
He said that it produced an amazing number of melons. This reminds me of
a story that my mother tells about her first visit to Kansas. She said
that all the Janzens loved watermelon, and that sister Rosie’s eyes
danced when she saw one. They would buy watermelons by the truckload and
just eat the heart.

When my father was growing up it was an accepted practice for children
to earn money for their father, and my grandfather had this down to a
fine art. When the boys were young, after the wheat was harvested, he
hired them out to other farmers. Pay for this labor naturally went to my
grandfather. My father said that each year before school started his
father took them all to the store for new clothes. The money he had
earned went to buy his clothes, and one year there was a small amount
left over. He was hoping that his father would give him this money, but
instead it went toward the purchase of his younger brother Herbert’s
clothes. This indicated how my grandfather thought about money. My
father was working for the benefit of the family, not himself. In a way,
there was a communal economy among these homesteading families, and it
probably insured their survival.

As the boys got into their teens, my grandfather would buy a farm and
have two of the boys and one of the girls run it. My father always
refers to periods when he would work on a new farm as his “Batching
Days,” batching being short for bachelor. In his case, he and his older
brother Roy (the Leroy was dropped) worked a farm, and sister Edna did
the cooking and laundry. Using this scheme, my grandfather was able to
acquire a lot of land, and I suspect that eventually he was considered
wealthy by the standards at that time. Even with a large family, my
grandfather had to hire outside labor, and my father would often tell
stories about the Bohemians that worked with them. One thing that he
learned from the Bohemians was how to cuss. This was, of course, in
their language (whatever that was) so he would say “Yaki dum fas coogie”
(spelled phonetically) to relieve his frustration, and not break any
church rules about swearing.

With so many horses and cattle, hay was important, and my father said
this need was filled by creating large piles of hay called “hay stacks”.
These enormous piles of hay had to be constructed in a special way so
they would drain water. My father often told about the time his father
put him in charge of the hay. His job was to stand on the stack, and as
the wagons brought the hay he had to spread it in a certain way. It was
my understanding that there was a certain amount of prestige in being in
charge of this job.

My grandparents spoke German in the home, and my father still remembered
poems that he had memorized in German. It was common across the country
for people of German descent to speak German and in major cities with
large German populations, like Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Milwaukee,
there were even newspapers printed in German. This practice came to a
relatively sudden halt with the start of World War I. People of German
decent faced a conflict between pride in their ancestral heritage and
national loyalty. As a means of demonstrating their national loyalty
many families ceased speaking German.

Religion was a big part of the Janzen’s lives, and before every meal my
grandfather would give a lengthy prayer. I remember these when I visited
Kansas, and when my grandparents would visit us. It is interesting that
there is a sharp division in German culture regarding smoking and
drinking alcoholic beverages. Most of the early breweries in the United
States were started by Germans, and I suspect these were the Catholic
Germans and not the Baptist Germans. Smoking and drinking (in a limited
way) did emerge among my father’s brothers, and it was their children
who influenced them. My cousin Leon told me that when the cousins
returned from World War II many of them smoked and drank beer and
introduced these to their father. I suspect that smoking and drinking
was done behind the barn and outside the view of their wives.

My grandfather retired from farming around the age of fifty-five. His
retirement was not his choice, but my grandmother’s, and she forced it
upon him in an interesting way. While he was in Kansas City selling
cattle, she purchased a house in Lorraine and had the boys (her sons)
move everything there. When my grandfather came home the house was
empty. Yes, my grandmother did have the money to buy a house. When her
parents died, she had inherited land, and when the oil boom hit Kansas
oil was discovered on her land. I believe I am correct that the oil
company gets seven-eighths of the oil a well produces and the landowner
one-eighth. My grandmother took her one-eighth and had the oil company
pay her half, with the other half divided into tenths and a share given
to each of her children. Each month, my parents received an oil check,
maybe for twenty or thirty dollars. Finally, when the well went dry it
produced gas and the check for that was eventually a dollar or less.
Although my grandfather’s retirement was forced upon him, I am sure that
every day he went to his sons’ farms and told them how to run things. I
say this because this is the way the sons acted when their children (my
cousins) started farming. My cousin Leon’s father, Wilbert, was still
telling him how to farm when Leon was in his 60s.

My father’s early schooling consisted of going to a one-room school
through the eighth grade. It was located east of Lorraine in an area
referred to as the “Oxhide.” A roster listing the students in the school
is titled, “Oxhide Public School.” Of the 21 students, six were Janzens.
Without a date, this list is difficult to interpret, but when my father
was in the fourth grade, his sister Rosa (who was four years older) and
brother Albert (who was five years older) were just in the 7th grade,
while his brother Henry (who was six years older) was in the 8th grade.
Perhaps not all children started school at the same age, and some may
have had to repeat a grade because of illness. It was always my
impression that my father’s parents took a neutral view towards
education, since going to high school appears to have been optional.
However, their participation in running the school system, as seen on
the above roster, seems to indicate that this was not the case.

I have sixteen hand-written pages of notes that my father’s sister Edna
wrote about her childhood. Here is an excerpt, containing what she says
about the “Oxide” School.

> Remember the “Old Oxide School, my the distance we had to walk, three
> and a half to four miles, how cold we’d get, we always liked to stop
> at the Bezemeck home to warm up, this was the half way place, then we
> go on, and many a time we would stop there in the evening and Mrs. B.
> would have lots of homemade bread baked that day, she would slice a
> loaf or two and we ate syrup on it, and also had hot coffee, then we
> went on our way rejoicing.
>
> How we would get lost in Gregory’s large pastures on a foggy morning.
> The Texas longhorn cattle Gregory has in the pasture we walked
> through, there were hundreds, remember how they would circle around us
> then take out after us, this one evening home here they came, seemed
> Leroy was always walking with Anna Heitschmidt and she told Leroy
> let’s kneel down and pray, Leroy said you can pray but I’m heading for
> the fence, my how we all ran, we barely were over the fence and the
> cattle were just at our heels.

Today an 8th grade education is considered only a step in the
educational process, but in the early 20th century it was considered a
noteworthy achievement. I have a copy of an 8th grade final exam dated
1895, from a school in Salina, Kansas. I doubt if today the average high
school senior could pass this exam. The importance of an 8th grade
education is reflected in the elaborate diploma my father received for
this accomplishment.

My father continued his education by going to the Lorraine High School,
and then he could drive a rig to school. The photograph titled, “Ed and
Herbert’s school rig” with a date of 17-18 (1917-1918) shows what I
always referred to as my father’s school bus. As an aside, I have the
impression that at times the Janzen brothers might have been “hell on
wheels”. My father had numerous stories of how they turned the rig over,
the horses got loose, and they had to walk home. From what I remember of
my uncles Al and Roy, this is believable. Teenagers were probably just
as wild with horse-drawn rigs as they are today when they get cars.
Actually, I know very little about my father’s high school years. He was
on the basketball team, and he told me that he was president of his
class. I later learned that he and Anna Schroeder were the only ones in
his grade.

I still have some of my father’s high school text books, and they give
an interesting insight into his education. I don’t know why, probably
out of nostalgia, but I‘ve never been able to discard these books. They
were obviously very important to him because he hauled them from Kansas,
probably to Mississippi, and to all the places that he lived in
Louisville. He wrote his name in most of these books, and sometimes the
year.There are eight school text books in the collection, and one other
titled *Freckles*, that I would call popular contemporary fiction of the
time. It was published in 1904, and on the inside is written:

A Merry Christmas

& A Happy New Year

For Edward

From Frieda Hornfeld

All of the text books are recent editions (the earliest being 1905) and
the depth to which the subject matter is treated is impressive. Four of
the texts are literary works: *Lady of the Lake* by Sir Walter Scott,
*The Snow Image* and *Twice Told Tales* (together as one book) by
Nathaniel Hawthorne, *Ben Hur* by Lew Wallace, and *The New Hudson
Shakespeare*. In the latter book is written:

> Edward C. Janzen Senior 1917-18 Lorraine High School

His report card for his junior year indicates that he took a course in
botany and it included a laboratory. I suspect that his book, Practical
Botany (545 pages), was the textbook, and I would judge it equivalent to
a college text on the subject today. My father’s report card for his
senior year indicated that he took English III and English History. His
text book for the latter class was *The History of England* (646 pages)
and *A Short History of England’s and America’s Literature*, was used in
English III. Both of these are impressive texts and would be college
level books by today’s standards. It should be remembered that not only
do these books treat the subjects in a sophisticated way, but the
teachers had to be well-versed in the subjects in order to teach from
them. My father’s diploma from the Lorraine Public School is dated April
26, 1918, and it is larger than any of my university diplomas. There was
an elaborate formal invitation to the commencement which mentioned the
class colors, flower, and motto. Only 37 years had passed since
homesteading began in Kansas, but already Lorraine was copying what was
happening in the cities.

It was my father’s older sister, Rosie (the nickname she acquired for
Rosa) who encouraged him to continue his education beyond high school. I
never thought about why she did this, but perhaps her motivation was my
father’s grades during his Senior year. They were impressive. For the
five subjects he took, his year’s average grades were A+ in four classes
and an A- in the other. In the fall of 1918, he entered Ottawa
University in Ottawa, Kansas, to take classes in business. Unlike his
brothers who stayed in farming, this pointed him in the direction of the
corporate world.

At this point, the sequence of events becomes unclear, and I attribute
this is to two major events that occurred simultaneously: the Spanish
Influenza and the end of World War I. According to my cousin Ronald
Nelson, the family historian, on September 12, 1918, my father received
his induction notice for military service. He never talked about this,
and I don’t know if this occurred just before or just after he went to
Ottawa. It appears that induction did not mean a call for duty, and my
father was still able to go to Ottawa University. Since the Armistice
ending the war was on November 11, 1918, I don’t know if these late
inductees were told not to report, or if they assumed this meant they no
longer had an obligation to report. In either case, my father’s ties to
the military ended.

It was also around 1918 that the Spanish Influenza hit Kansas. This
disease, which is estimated to have killed 50 million people world-wide,
was the most devastating epidemic in human history. When the flu struck,
at the urging of his parents, my father left Ottawa, and returned home.
By the end of 1918 the threat of the flu lessened, but instead of
returning to Ottawa he enrolled in The Kansas Wesleyan Business College
in Salina, Kansas. I found a certificate awarding my father a \$125
scholarship to the Salina school, and this may be the reason he didn’t
return to Ottawa. In a note my father wrote about this time period he
says that in the fall of 1919 he left for Charleston, Mississippi, to be
employed at the Lamb-Fish Lumber Company as an assistant bookkeeper.
Therefore, he never completed his degree, though it is my understanding
that the College was responsible for getting him the job in Mississippi.
So, at the age of twenty my father left Lorraine for a career outside
farming. I doubt if he had ever been outside Kansas, and moving to
Mississippi, away from his family, had to have been a traumatic
experience. Although he never returned to Kansas, I believe that for the
rest of his life he considered himself a son of the Sunflower State.
